
4

one treatment. The distributions of treatment alternatives are likely to vary across different institutional environments, making it difficult to compare studies from different countries. We thus believe that scientific progress in this area – particularly in terms of providing the kind of knowledge that policy-makers demand – requires a clear setting of realistically competing treatment strategies, characterized by well-defined policy parameters.

Our paper relates closely to two existing studies. The first is Frölich _et al_ . (2004), which examines the impacts of vocational rehabilitation programs in Sweden on the basis of nonparametric matching estimators. This study relies on the assumption that all variables that simultaneously affect the VR participation decision and subsequent labor market outcomes are observed. The main conclusions are that there are no favorable effects of VR programs at all, but that workplace rehabilitation is better (less bad) than the alternative strategies of, e.g., “social” rehabilitation or education. The second study is Aakvik, _et al_ . (2005), which examines the impacts of vocational rehabilitation in Norway (for females only) on the basis of a latent variable model motivated by economic theory. This study exploits local variations in the “degree of rationing” to identify the distribution of treatment effects within the framework of a three-equation (one for the treatment decision, one for the outcome if treated, and one for the outcome if nontreated) single-factor model with normally distributed error terms.[1] The resultant empirical estimates suggest that VR participation has little or no effect on subsequent employment propensities, and that the effects even tend to be negative for actual participants. The estimates are very imprecise, however, and the authors emphasize that they are at best suggestive.

> 1 The degree of rationing is calculated as the percentage of applicants in local districts who do not participate in the program.


---

5

The purpose of the present paper is to provide new and comprehensive empirical evidence on the effectiveness of alternative rehabilitation strategies, based on an empirical approach that exploits (idiosyncratic) local variations in rehabilitation policies as the source of exogenous variation in treatment exposure. This approach relies on the idea that, _viewed from the population of disabled individuals_ , there is an element of randomassignment-like variation in local authorities’ treatment priorities. In practice, these local variations are identified by the distribution of observed treatments among _other_ claimants registering in the same treatment environment at approximately the same time (controlled for individual and environmental characteristics and local labor market conditions). Our empirical basis is administrative register data from Norway encompassing the complete population of individuals that entered the temporary disability (TDI) program – and, hence, came under the risk of being referred to vocational rehabilitation – from 1996 through 2005. We examine the impacts of vocational rehabilitation strategies on labor market outcomes for a period of up to seven years after entry into TDI, with particular emphasis on subsequent employment, earnings, and social insurance dependency.

While the idea of exploiting local variation in treatment strategies originated from the emergence of qualitative empirical evidence indicating that rehabilitation policies do vary a lot across different social insurance districts in Norway, we will confirm its validity through a rigorous quantitative analysis in this paper. It is notable, however, that the qualitative evidence to a large extent attributes the variation to differences in local “treatment cultures”, as well as to inherited practices and program suppliers (Proba, 2012). The resultant differences in treatment practices have been allowed to thrive and persist precisely because “hard” evidence regarding the treatment effects of


---

6

various programs is almost non-existent, leaving plenty of room for local administrators to base their policy choices on a combination of individual judgment, guesswork, personal experience, and convenience.

Our empirical analysis consists of two parts; a “reduced form” analysis, where we examine the impacts of the local treatment environment on subsequent outcomes for all potential participants, and an “instrumental variables” (IV) analysis, where we examine the impacts of actual participation in distinct treatment types, using characteristics of the local treatment environment as instruments. The reduced form analysis identifies the average intention-to-treat-effects of marginal changes in the local “treatment portfolio”. A main advantage of this approach is that it is valid even if the treatment environment affects potential participants beyond the impacts associated with actual participation in a particular activity; e.g. by modifying incentives to accept (and search for) jobs or to leave the program for other reasons. It also scores high on the criterion of policyrelevance, since it is the design of rehabilitation institutions and strategies that corresponds most closely to the policy makers’ choice variables. A major drawback, however, is that “local treatment strategies” are intrinsically unobserved, and hence bound to be measured with significant error. This biases the estimated reduced form coefficients toward zero. The instrumental variables strategy solves the measurement error problem, and also provides coefficient estimates that are more interpretable than the reduced form coefficients. It identifies the average effects of participating in particular program activities for the sub-population of TDI claimants whose treatment choices are affected by the design of the local treatment environment (the “compliers”). However, the validity of this interpretation requires that the treatment environments affect post-TDI outcomes only through their impacts on actual program participation. Moreover, while we can use


---

7

all TDI spells in the reduced form analysis, we can only use completed spells (for which the realized treatment has been revealed) in the instrumental variables analysis.

An important aim of our analysis is to compare the effectiveness of alternative VR designs, distinguished by their emphasis on employment versus education, by their use of sheltered versus non-sheltered treatment environments, and by their strictness with respect to requiring that vocational rehabilitation has really been tried before a permanent disability insurance (PDI) can be granted. Hence, it is closely related to an ongoing debate in the literature about the respective achievements of the so-called place-and-train and train-and-place rehabilitation strategies, distinguished by their view on whether required skills-upgrading should take place before a placement in the labor market is attempted or vice versa. While empirical research from the U.S. generally finds that a place-and-train strategy is superior to train-and-place (Skinner et al., 2009; Campbell et al., 2011), European evidence is more mixed (Burns et al, 2007; Catty et al., 2008; Howard et al. 2010). Our analysis is also related to a recent U.S. literature, examining labor supply behavior among rejected disability insurance applicants. This literature essentially shows that disability insurance applicants whose claims were rejected due to the assignment of a “strict” judge, do tend to return to the labor market, although with significantly lower earnings than before; see Bound (1989), French and Song (2009), Maestas et al. (2011), and Von Wachter et al. (2011).

Our main finding is that vocational rehabilitation strategies giving high priority to early placement in the regular labor market are the more successful in terms of raising subsequent (non-subsidized) employment and earnings. Strategies emphasizing support for regular education also exhibit favorable post-TDI results, but at the cost of significantly postponing the return to regular employment and self-sufficiency. The alter-

